[MUSIC PLAYING]
[TRAFFIC NOISE]
[CHATTER]
>> When I was a little kid, I
always was interested in what
is this all about.
The big questions.
>> Sometimes I'd wake up very
early in the morning and just
sit outside because
it was so quiet.
>> A sense of loneliness,
a sense of isolation,
a sense of running out of time.
That's always kind of been
in the back of my mind.
[BABY NOISES]
>> I wouldn't say any of
us were Buddhists then.
But we were slowly evolving into
something that was Buddhism.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As they fly fast
through the open sky,
as the teardrops
from your starry eye.
As the birds over the ocean fly.
As the earth devours
all things that die.
As the baby blossoms
on the tree arrive.
As the sun comes up,
the world comes alive.
As the little seed
sprouts deep inside,
as the grass, green,
grows far and wide.
As the cool winter blows
through the still of the night.
As the Earth operates and
makes it feel all right.
As the full moon pulls
on the rising tide.
As the light shines bright
and you cannot hide.
That's the truth.
It can no longer be denied.
As you surrender to love
and let your heart confide.
As your thirst is quenched
and you are gratified.
As your everlasting
soul is purified.
Bear witness.
[CHATTER]
>> Everything has two sides.
So unfortunate sight
is we lost country.
Fortunate sight is we're done
moving all over the world.
I grew up in Tibet.
Do you know where Tibet is?
>> Tibet, China?
>> Tibet, yes.
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> To a certain degree, maybe
we were just too comfortable up
there in the mountains, in
the land of snows and doing
your own little
thing over there.
[HORN]
[BELLS]
To be sort of shaken
out of that state
to investigate
furthermore something
is good for the Tibetans also.
>> Hey.
How are you?
>> Fine.
And you?
>> No place to sit.
[LAUGHTER]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[CROWD ANSWERS IN SPANISH]
>> This is the action man.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Anyone would have mentioned
Buddhism 10 years ago, like,
psh, OK.
Whatever.
You know?
Let's go party.
[LAUGHS]
>> When I started
reading about it,
I thought it was
really depressing.
It was like, suffering,
the cause of suffering.
And I'm 19, from New Hampshire.
I was really thinking
about suffering very much.
And I don't think I am--
I don't think I'm
interested in Buddhism.
>> It seems a little odd
that a tradition that's been
hibernating in the Himalayas
could be so relevant
to a modern Western lifestyle,
but fundamentally it is.
>> Well, because they're dealing
with the same exact issues.
[LAUGHS] You know?
Why am I so sad?
>> However the civilizations
over the last 2,500 years have
changed, the human emotions
and human neuroses, in essence,
has not changed.
>> The Buddha asked
all these questions.
Like, the Buddha's
main question was how
do you find happiness in this?
Old age, death,
uncertainty, suffering.
>> it was a totally incredible
thing for me to come in contact
with a tradition
that 2,500 years ago,
a normal person like us decided
that he was really going
to take a serious look at
this question of suffering.
>> For my party, I
spin around so fast.
>> You spin around at the party?
I was born into a place
of profound privilege.
I mean, just
mind-blowing good fortune
was the world I was born into.
So we didn't really
have any problems,
and yet we still suffered.
>> When I was about 17,
I ran away from home.
And I pretty much was a street
kid for about four years.
Those times when I'd,
say, take to the desert,
or while just totally
alone and going
through really hard times.
The underside of the
road, just get rained on.
You know.
- Probably that was probably
the first time that I actually
thought about anything about how
I am as a person, how I relate
to other people, how
can I help other people
and how we are interconnected
and all that stuff.
Definitely at that point,
you know, you see people,
they've got all this stuff.
And it's like, well, shoot.
I ain't got nothing, and
I'm pretty well fine.
You know?
I mean, what's up with that?
It really made me
question some things.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I don't even think being
a nun is the best thing
for everyone.
It's just for me, individually,
it's just very helpful.
My greatest obstacle, first
understanding Tibetan culture.
That was really difficult.
And getting used to it
and being able to
feel comfortable.
And being a woman has
been very difficult.
Here at the Institute
of Buddhist Dialectics,
in my class, I was
the only woman.
So I was very, very
lonely sometimes.
Extremely lonely.
>> When I was first locked up
in that county jail, literally,
when the cell door slammed shut,
it was just a total awakening
to all the denial I'd been
in about so much in my life.
And my son was nine
years old at the time
and was just devastated
by the decisions I'd made
and how I'd let my teacher down
and my family and the community
and so forth.
And it was just undeniable.
And so I just became driven to
radically change everything.
[SINGING BOWL]
>> It doesn't matter
what role you play,
or what condition you are in.
Because conditions
are very unreliable.
Sometimes the universe
is smiling upon us,
and sometimes it changes.
That whole world is learning
that there is no security.
>> A cascade of selling
swept over the markets.
By just after 3
o'clock, investors
were just dumping shares.
>> Everything's happening
so fast, it's unbelievable.
>> The illusion of control that
we've had in modern Western
culture is largely
disintegrating.
And the experience of
reality we have now,
where you don't know what's
going to happen next--
>> Unbelievable display
of mother nature.
It's frightening.
It is also awe-inspiring
and otherworldly.
>> Other cultures have that.
I mean, that's just the way
it's been throughout all
of human history.
And that does open
the spiritual gate.
>> To imagine Buddhism
taking root in the culture
of the 1950s or even
early 1960s, impossible.
There was just this
monolithic American culture.
It was unquestionable.
It was successful.
It was unchallenged.
[RAGTIME MUSIC]
It really did feel
to me, from the time
I was about four or five,
that I'd somehow gotten
dropped into the wrong family.
>> Whatever we've been
told is the truth.
The way the world
functions, what we are.
All the givens through
childhood at some point
are dissonant with
something inside of us.
>> When I was quite
young, when I was 15,
I remember becoming
aware of being aware.
One night, I was sitting
out on the roof of our house
at the lake.
I was listening to the pine
needles in the white pines.
They were dropping
onto the roof.
Something changed
for me about life.
>> I mean, that's how
people were back then.
I mean, they were coming out
of a very strict sort of world,
and this just was
a seismic shift
that was happening for people.
[DRUMMING AND MUSIC]
[CROWD CHANTING]
[FOLK MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We were part of a generation
of people who basically said,
I want out.
That impulse was
certainly selfish.
It wasn't I want
to save the world.
It was I want this suffering
to stop inside of me.
>> India was kind of
flavor of the month.
The Beatles had just been, and
everyone wanted to go to India.
And Baba Ram Dass and Timothy
Leary and these people
had popularized this whole
idea of Eastern spirituality.
>> I was not going
to India for tourism.
I was really looking
for something.
I really was fed up
with Western culture.
I said, I really
need something new.
>> When I heard about these
buses that you could get
on and go from England to
Nepal, drive through all these
countries.
Think about driving through
like Iraq and Iran, Afghanistan,
Pakistan.
>> We didn't think
about the dangers.
We didn't think about the risks.
It was what we had to do.
We had to do.
>> I had absolutely no idea
about Hinduism or Buddhism
or nothing, really.
And then on the way,
I met one American,
and he had been already with
the Tibetan Lamas in Nepal.
And he was talking to me a
lot about Kathmandu and Nepal
and all the Tibetans, and the
Tibetans, and the Tibetans.
>> Eye on the Himalayas.
Tibet's religious tradition is
personified by the Dalai Lama.
These are films
of the Dalai Lama,
taken in less troubled times.
News now reaches the
world that 20,000 Tibetans
have risen with him against
their Chinese Overlords.
>> Two days after
the Lhasa uprising,
the Dalai Lama escaped
from his palace.
The Dalai Lama's escape
sparked an exodus
of refugees as tens of
thousands of Tibetans
followed him into exile.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In 1959, he came from Tibet.
>> It took almost one
month, all time walking.
We walk all the way.
>> And then sometimes we
came through snow mountain,
day and night, on horses.
Sometimes we were caught
by the Chinese Army
and they put us for a
short period in prison.
>> When the Dalai
Lama left Tibet,
I was still in high school.
And somehow I heard
the news on the radio
that he had left Tibet
and entered India.
And somehow there was
some sense that this
was something special.
>> Thousands crowd the railway
station in New Delhi to welcome
the Dalai Lama.
>> [TIBETAN SPEECH]
>> Speaking in Tibetan,
the Dalai Lama charges that
the Tibetan people are
being exterminated.
That their culture and
religion are being stamped out.
>> Actually this
cultural revolution,
destruction of Tibet, actually
proved for us the real value
of Buddha's teachings.
>> [LAUGHS] OK.
OK.
>> When I first
arrived in Dharamsala,
I struggled up the
hill with my rucksack.
I came to a large rock on
which were written the letters,
[NON-ENGLISH],, but I
didn't know what they were.
If we go down to this--
through here.
>> But this is to the--
>> Oh, look at that.
I lived in there, on my--
>> Dharamsala in those days was
really just flattened tin cans
and little shops.
People selling their
old clothes and stuff.
>> It was a one-horse town.
There were no Jeeps,
there were no cars.
>> This is this Tibetan
amalah who I loved.
That's me.
It was really the
Tibetans that got me--
the main thing was just
the warmth of the people.
That feeling of joy.
And I could not figure it
out because most of them
had lost everything.
Some of them had seen
their own families
killed in front of them.
>> They were working on roads.
That was what I found amazing
about Tibetans is this ability
to adjust from being a prince
or a nobleman to having nothing.
We found that all of our
preconceptions, the things we
had been trained
as, as children, as
to what was proper, what was
desirable, were not desirable.
>> I became close and attached
to Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche
and spent, I don't know, 13
years now, non-stop with him.
>> There's a Tibetan expression
that you cannot stand parting
away from someone like
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche.
Even like in the
day, just to go away,
you feel you are missing
something very precious.
And that's not very
common in life.
>> When I got to Kathmandu, I
heard that there was this Lama
there named Karmapa.
I was really fascinated by him
and started going to see him.
And so I thought well, he's a
monk, I should become a nun.
That would be
following his example.
That was really
why I became a nun.
>> When I went first time to
Nepal and the first time I met
the Dharma that
was in Kopan Hill.
There was a Lama teaching,
and this was Lama Lama Thubten
Yeshe.
And he would teach in English.
>> You cannot jump into such
inner freedom, sort of like,
cannot jump.
>> He had this kind
of odd English.
>> You cannot jump
such inner freedom.
>> That he'd learned
from hippies.
>> Lama Yeshe and Lama Zopa
first taught Westerners in '71.
And it just started to blossom.
These Westerners climbing
up the hill over rice
paddies to get up there.
We had a month of
teachings and then
contemplating on
these teachings.
>> Although, since you were
born, up until now, you said,
my mind is that.
My mind is that.
You have no idea
what is your mind.
Isn't that silly?
Every day, using "my mind is
that, that, blah, blah, blah."
But you don't know what is
it, your nature of your mind.
>> And that was a shock for
me, because I had never thought
that you could have
wisdom without thinking.
And I was sick of thinking.
I mean, I was completely
sick of my thoughts
and my mental state, and I was
looking for some breakthrough.
>> So that really had--
it really gave you
the opportunity
to work with the
nitty-gritty of the mind.
And I think that one of
the big realizations for me
during that month was
yes, the mind does
have the capacity to change.
[SIGHS]
[BELL RINGING]
>> I've read quite a
few books about Tibet.
Tibet was somewhere in
space, kind of remote.
But then news got
around amongst people
that there was going
to be a Lama that was
going to turn up in Kensington.
To have a Lama turn up
was quite extraordinary
because we never imagined
that would happen.
>> Well, I was in the
market for a teacher.
And an old friend
wrote to me and said,
I'm coming to Los Angeles
with this great teacher,
and you must,
absolutely must see him.
He spoke in a downtown, really
shabby, old, Embassy Theater,
I think it was called.
And he walked on the stage,
and I was electrified.
>> Sit on the cushion.
But don't make a
big deal about that,
now you are going to meditate.
Just sit down and relax.
>> When I met Trungpa Rinpoche,
I probably cried for two hours.
You know, a sense of
having met something
that was so deeply precious to
me and not having any idea why.
>> Trungpa swept through
America just like a rocket.
He starts traveling
all over the country.
He teaches right
away, all the time.
[LAUGHTER]
He knew when the Chinese
invaded Tibet it wasn't just
a question of taking the
teachings out and putting them
under your robe and getting
the hell out of the country.
It was a question of bringing
that living wisdom to a brand
new culture, thousands
of miles and a completely
different language away.
>> And giving up, opening,
surrendering from that point
of view actually pays
a very important part.
Because finally, you
begin to actually let
go of your aggression.
And you begin to
hear much better
and see much better
when you give
more and more of this
uptightness or holding back--
>> A Dharma that was not
some kind of specialized,
cloistered, monastic Dharma,
but a Dharma that was fully
integrated with
society and with life.
>> He dove into Western life.
He drank, he smoked,
he broke all the rules.
>> People were always
so outraged by him.
>> He was a fantastic artist.
As a calligrapher, as a flower
arranger, as a photographer,
as a writer, as a poet.
And that was one of the things
that was enormously attractive
about him.
>> An interesting part of it is
this is in Tibetan tradition,
there's no word for artist.
>> And so he was immediately
working with a new energy.
The energy that said,
OK, tell it to us.
Give it to us.
Tell us what to do.
We'll make it happen.
And he had every confidence
that we would get it.
>> I spent a lot of time in
some kind of retreat context
and also traveling with him.
And then I'd go off and be a
crazy person, smuggling cocaine
in South America.
It was actually coming back from
Japan with Trungpa Rinpoche,
that I got pulled aside.
I knew I was either
going to go on the run,
or I was going to prison for
a long time at that point.
And he told me I should
stay and face it.
And he said that even if I
was in prison for a long time,
I could still practice,
and I could still
work with him as my teacher.
It wasn't until years
later in prison,
really, that I was
able to finally
do what he'd been
asking all of us
to do for a long time, which
was really do the practice
and really integrate it so
that we weren't just trying
to get this contact
high from him
but to really be able to
generate that within ourselves.
>> I remember when I
came back from India,
and I wanted to go
to a Tibetan place.
And the only place
in the entire country
was in Freehold, New Jersey.
And then you think
about what there is now.
[PEOPLE RECITING IN UNISON]
>> It was as easy as putting
Buddha and Los Angeles
on Google Search, and a
couple of centers came up.
[SINGING BOWL]
[CHANTING]
>> No, no.
Just with the gold.
Not the base coat.
I've always, my whole life,
been against real estate.
I grew up with these great
teachers, never owned anything.
And always these
teachers telling us,
Padmasambhava said, if you want
to go down to the hell realms,
have students and a monastery.
That's how we grew up.
Even this place, none of
us have any clear idea
of how it happened.
>> A very strong group of
people that were friends.
We started a little group.
We just practiced
and studied together.
>> Rinpoche would come.
She came back yearly, and the
students became more and more,
and then it became known
as the Baltimore retreat.
>> And they ended up paying a
lot of money for every rental
place that the
retreats were held.
>> We said, we're paying so much
rent, we're doing so much work.
Why don't we find
some place permanent?
>> And then they called me
to come and look at the land.
There was no strategy or
no something, anything.
It just happened.
We walked in through the door.
There was a husband and a
wife who were living here.
It was a hot day.
There was a nice swimming pool.
There was a horse
stable which they
envisioned to have
retreats, rooms over there.
>> You have to get the zoning
board to give you an OK.
And then you have the
whole county council.
The zoning board meeting,
one of the members
said, can you tell us
how Buddhism relates
to our Lord Jesus Christ?
So I gave a little talk about--
impromptu, saying,
we're all basically
looking for
openness, compassion.
The next meeting-- and
the place was packed--
there were people who had strong
objections to us being here.
But by and large, everyone
there, they all said, no.
This is about religious freedom.
You have to let
these people here.
At that moment, I said,
I'm proud to be American.
>> Since then, it's been
done, and we've been having
our annual retreats over here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> I do liken the sort of spread
of Dharma from India to Tibet
that happened between the 7th
and the 10th century to, when
it went from Tibet
via India to the West,
Marpa and the great translators,
they did make these arduous
journeys to get to India.
They walked for
days, months, even,
and they went back again and
helped spread the Dharma.
>> I mean, these guys had
it tough, but they did it.
They did a good job of
translating it from Sanskrit
into Tibetan and did it
without Microsoft Word
and any other kind
of editing processes.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>> Most of my training
so far is in Tibetan.
Tibetan grammar, I've got
a little bit of history,
some Dharma, little
bit of debate.
It's just getting started.
Me, I've got the
easy way, you know?
You know?
I've got dictionaries on my
computer, all kinds of stuff.
>> It's astounding to
think that a year ago,
we couldn't read
a line of Tibetan.
Khandro Rinpoche was
with us from the--
I mean, he taught
us the letters.
He taught us how
to say the sounds.
He taught us how to
write the letters.
>> One thing that I thought
I can actually do to help
the Buddha Dharma,
transplant it in the West,
is to train a group of students
to become Dharma translators.
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> I thought, since I'm going
to be giving the traditional
training to my son, why not
invite some of the students
to join him?
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
The last time when I went to
see His Fullness, [INAUDIBLE]
Rinpoche, he told me, your
son, while he's over there,
he becomes a monk or
a lay practitioner.
Make sure that he becomes
teacher over the Dharma.
>> My upbringing
was nontraditional.
I was maybe 10 years old.
He was in the living room,
and I walked up to him,
and I was on the floor.
I kneeled, and I said, what is--
Dad, what is the nature of mind?
And he said, OK, I'll show you.
So look at me.
Look at me very closely.
A few seconds passed.
A few more seconds.
I started feeling, what
should I be looking for?
What's going on?
And suddenly, he
shouted, flat out
in my face, one massive cry.
And my mind was--
it felt-- my body was paralyzed,
and my mind completely
cleared of everything,
just out of pure shock.
And he said, see?
That's it.
[INAUDIBLE]
Do you know where
that herb packet went?
>> What herb packet, honey?
We also didn't push
him in the Dharma.
Rinpoche also wanted to
give him a Western education
and then gave him
the choice of what
he wanted to do after school.
>> Actually, it was a
very logical choice.
To not go immediately
into college
and to go to the
Himalayas to study.
[BELL]
If I'm going to go on the
route to a Western education,
I want to at least have
the seed of happiness.
>> To me, Tibet is like, for I
guess a thousand years almost,
you had all these
brilliant masters.
Every generation produced
these legendary meditators
and scholars.
It just staggers the mind to
imagine the combined willpower
and brain power
that was directed
towards the single goal of
developing spiritual technology
for freeing the human mind.
>> You probably had more and
more books in Tibet than you
did in any other society.
They were manuscripts,
so there was maybe
one or two copies in
the entire country,
but they contained
teachings that
would disappear if that
one copy was disappeared.
So we began a project in India.
Tibetans would come
in, and they'd say,
I have this manuscript.
And we'd say, OK.
We'll buy 20 copies of it.
So they took it out, and they
had this old technology where
you have the glass plates.
They'd sit and-- and
these books then became
the basis of what we studied.
But there was a problem.
They're disappearing.
They're fading.
Then I decided, well, why
don't we do something else?
So we put it on the web.
We've got over 10,000 volumes
that anybody can download.
The word for emptiness it's
what's called [TIBETAN]..
Where do we find [TIBETAN]?
Let's see, it's
found in 966 texts.
>> If we look at this expansion
of Buddhism coming out of Asia,
and then we see, Buddhism
has already evolved.
It's not stayed static anywhere
for the last 2,500 years.
It's always assimilated, adapted
for the particular cultures
and so forth.
Now it's adapting
to world culture.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
East-West meeting is this way.
I feel not only religion,
not as a religion, but simply
the science of mind
and Western science.
>> I've had the conjecture
that looking at brain changes
associated with meditation
is something worth doing
for decades.
It is, I think, quite
remarkable how close a parallel
there is between our
modern understanding
of neuroplasticity and
the Buddhist notions
of transformation.
In simple terms,
neuroplasticity means
that the brain can change
in response to experience.
>> And I'm just going to line
up and come straight down.
Align the first sensor.
Be sure the midline
is set correctly.
For meditation, for
example, prefrontal cortex
is one of the main
areas that we look.
So left and right.
>> Our brains are
constantly being shaped,
wittingly or unwittingly.
And we can leave the shaping
of our brains to happenstance,
or we can take
more responsibility
by actually training our mind
in a way which will promote
more healthy qualities of mind.
>> They did my brain test.
They invited me to
America for a brain test.
And finally, my picture came out
on the "National Geographic,"
on the cover.
[LAUGHS]
>> And so now we see, as in this
Mind and Life meeting with His
Holiness, the Dalai Lama, we
see the traditional Buddhist
teachings are brought
into a completely modern,
contemporary context.
>> [INAUDIBLE] has talked in
detail about what he presented
as the truth--
>> This is a time when the
Tibetans also can benefit from
the strengths of
Western culture.
>> Religions are
always changing.
And there's a huge change when
you cross a cultural frontier.
>> There's always the core in
the Dharma that brings me back,
but there are cultural
influences that put me off.
Particularly around
some women's issues.
>> There's a lot of
denial and ignoring.
Because it's painful to
know that the religion
you've given your life to
has this really major flaw.
The male privilege
of Tibetan Buddhism,
traditionally, it's
incredibly intense.
>> Male chauvinism is one of
the oldest habitual patterns
in the world.
And I don't think it's
going to go that easily.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> You look even here, in
this Western community,
for this ceremony, there's not
a single woman in the front row.
When you set up
your whole system
so that women don't
end up trained
well enough to sit in the
front row, there's a problem.
>> Right now, there is
no geshe degree for nuns.
Geshe was basically a
degree that monks get,
usually monks get when they have
studied the main five texts.
There's a lot of debate about
giving that title to nuns who
are now doing the same studies.
>> It's really-- it
contradicts Buddhism.
It's not helping Buddhism.
It's actually
interfering Buddhism.
And these are the culture
habits, if possible, should go.
>> That is one of the major
things the West has to offer
Tibetan Buddhism is a new
way of seeing women and a way
of examining the cultural
influences on the Dharma.
>> Because we perceive
true existence.
Because of that very
powerful mind, ignorance,
it colors all our experiences.
>> I have traveled
so much in the world,
and I have seen that until
and unless we give equal
opportunity in
terms of education,
in terms of anything for women,
we are not going to achieve
very much.
>> [INAUDIBLE].
So in this sense, you could
say, with karma, of course,
strictly speaking,
karma was action.
The action that [INAUDIBLE].
>> Buddhism must fully
integrate into the 21st century.
We can't just take
it as a museum piece.
[BELLS RINGING]
>> The system doesn't
port over perfectly.
The system that
they'd set up there,
it doesn't mesh perfectly
with our society.
>> Everything seems to be
very flashy, coming from--
it's like, wow, all these
paintings and stuff like that.
>> When I first came
and saw things white,
middle class Americans bowing
to this Asian man, I'm like,
this is so weird.
>> The form of the
religious form,
why is that you have offerings?
There was an irritating
quality of it.
I always have to
look at the chart.
That's what I mean.
I have to look at the chart.
It's not integral to my being.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> Discussions of how much is
culture and how much is Dharma.
Definitely distinctions need to
be understood by the student.
I would really encourage the
students to really do this,
but I would not really--
I would think Western people
are wasting their time when
they are ironing
the scarf and trying
to unfold them and fold them.
That's a bit of a waste of time.
>> Even I thought before,
tradition is not that
important, tradition.
Now when I really look and look,
tradition's very important.
Like, example, remembering
the root texts.
I taught many Westerners.
"Why do we need to
memorize the root texts?"
It's too much energy,
and in the West,
we do not do this anymore.
>> Tsoknyi Rinpoche emphasizes--
what kind of thing
he has going on
is this idea of
scholar/practitioner,
and he emphasizes that in
every teaching he gives.
>> When we grew up, we really--
the teachers said, if you do
not remember the root texts,
you are empty.
Anybody asks any
questions, you say,
wait, wait, where's my book?
Sorry, today I
can't say anything
because my book is not here.
My notebook is not here.
So everything need to
be within yourself.
>> I like challenges,
so this kind of thing,
where you can just
practically-- like,
it's a very pragmatic religion.
You can work on yourself
in a way every day,
every moment of your life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Be present.
Be loud.
Be awake.
No matter how.
Be informed.
You're freed again.
Drop illusions.
And learn to live.
>> That last intensity,
ego might not like it.
So in here, the high, top, peak
intensity, ego [INAUDIBLE]..
Coming to the Dharma
is no problem.
You can come from anger.
You can come from jealously.
You can come from woundedness.
You can come from curiosity.
And you can come anything.
You can come.
Once you come, then
you have to be open.
You cannot hold on one thing.
You have to be open-minded.
Then you see how the path goes.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> As Buddha said--
>> My.
>> My-- [LAUGHS] my form,
my dreamlike form appeared
to dreamlike beings to show them
the dreamlike path that leads
to a dreamlike enlightenment.
>> One more time.
I love-- it's like
a nectar for me.
>> My dreamlike form appeared
to dreamlike beings to show them
the dreamlike path that leads
to a dreamlike enlightenment.
>> [SINGING SOFTLY] Morning.
[CHATTER]
>> I am in Mexico.
I'm wearing the Mexican style
of dress to show where I am.
[BELL RINGING]
>> I travel with Rinpoche mostly
when he travels to the West,
which means Europe,
the Americas.
And so I get to be in very
close proximity with Rinpoche
and not only listen
to the teachings,
but also seeing how
Rinpoche puts the Dharma
into everyday life.
>> I can be staying
in my student's house
or friend's house or hotel.
I try to act like I'm
sitting in my home.
I'll have stylish hair.
You go into that.
You ask a question, I answer.
So all the time, you
feel connected with me.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Whatever limitations we
might have as to our space,
this is how I am, this is
how I deal with things,
when you are with these people,
they sort of ask you or do
things to move you away from
that comfortable point, right?
>> And that's [INAUDIBLE],,
pushing slowly.
Slowly pushing.
>> It's intense.
It's just your way of
manifesting your wisdom.
It's just about being
natural all the time.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Thank you very much.
I enjoy a lot.
>> Rinpoche does a lot of his
activities quite spontaneous.
And so I was thinking that
we were going to be late,
you know.
Kind of in the morning.
Rinpoche is calm, as he
always is, and calms me down,
of course.
>> It's so good
to have you here.
>> Yes, thank you.
>> We're almost ready.
>> OK.
[INAUDIBLE] here?
>> In the 21st
century, how it is,
you don't have to
change teaching.
You don't have to change
the meaning of teaching.
It's just a matter
of how to present.
Welcome.
I would like to
introduce meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We exist in a state of
perpetual interdependency.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Honestly, if Americans' only
option was to study completely
traditional Tibetan Buddhism,
I don't think many people would
be interested in Buddhism.
>> I haven't registered, and
we came to the open house last
week--
>> The same when we founded the
Interdependence Project is that
people want teachings to
be accessible and relevant
to their life.
They don't want
them watered down.
>> Welcome to the
Interdependence Project.
Mindfulness practice
is the basis
of what we'll be talking
about for the next 10 weeks.
>> Perhaps the reason Buddhist
teachers would have an easier
time to communicate with
Westerners is because they all
share the same cultural
language, value system,
and even philosophy, too.
>> I started out being very
conservative as a Dharma
teacher.
But I actually am
starting to feel
that it's not very good
for Western students
to try to encourage them through
a path that has so much form.
And the reason is that
their lives are already
so packed with form.
It wasn't that way in Tibet.
In Tibet, there's a lot
more space as a culture.
But in the West, it is.
Every minute is
filled with form.
So give them more form doesn't
really seem to work that well.
So we're going to
do a practice now
that involves breathing
into the lower belly.
Feel the space opening.
In breath.
Filling the lower belly.
Medium to full breath.
Through the body
work, what we find is
it gets Western people
out of their heads.
--notice the sense of emptiness.
And when you live in
your body in that way,
it's so much more compelling
and liberating than thinking.
>> I knew I really wanted
to do this retreat center.
From the age of 19, I'd
always been asking permission
to my teachers.
But I felt that I had
a different experience
as a Western woman, and
that I needed to honor that.
I had to make my own
decisions and my own mistakes
and see what happened, at
least here at Tara Mandala.
There's a sort of neo-generation
of people that really realize
they don't want to go
into the corporate world,
and that they want something
substantial and inner.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> And it's like, I get there,
but then it's like my heart
stops again.
And I can't do anything--
>> And those people
are attracted here,
and then they become
practitioners.
[SINGING]
I'm kind of a funny
combination of being
very traditional and at the
same time, very experimental.
>> You get angry, sad, fierce.
>> Angry and sad and fierce.
It can't be Tibetan
Buddhism forever.
You know, it has to become
the Vagrayana tradition
as it's expressed in the West.
But I always struggle
with these questions
because I have such a
respect for the tradition.
I love it.
I don't want it to be
harmed or diminished.
And I want to make sure
the depth is happening.
Tara Mandala, that's my
primary goal is depth practice.
>> Since Sangha is like family.
Every Sangha, every community,
have their own personalities.
Basically, there's
something for everybody.
My love of Buddhism was one
of first memories that I have.
I believed for a
long time, to be
spiritual was to be very
serious and to not enjoy life.
So I had lots of those concepts
and ideas that I had to drop.
And then the way
I'm teaching, I let
go of a lot of beautiful forms.
It requires tremendous sense
of if our activities to have
lots of images, big ultra.
So I'm quite lazy, and also,
in some sense, a minimalist.
It's not me delivering
another lecture.
This is about going inside.
Open our heart and be
honest to ourselves.
One of the questions
that we might like to ask
is why am I not free right now?
So I let go of lots of forms
and focusing more the heart
of Buddhist teachings,
which is very profound,
yet it is simple.
>> You know, the foundations,
the Four Noble Truths,
there is absolutely no way
you can get any understanding
of the Dharma without it really
being sort of squeezed from
the essence of a thorough
understanding of the Four Noble
Truths.
>> What are the
Four Noble Truths?
In four words,
they're suffering,
the cause of suffering,
the cessation of suffering,
and the path.
[SIRENS]
[BABY CRYING]
[TRAFFIC NOISES]
>> From the Buddhist
perspective,
we're all trapped in this sort
of wheel of existence called
Samsara.
The idea is this is sort
of the First Noble Truth,
that life is suffering.
>> Going about
things in the old,
ordinary way will lead
to suffering, period.
Brookeye Productions.
I feel like people spend
so much time focusing
on their career or their bodies
or what they look like, I mean,
hello.
People, we spend such little
time focused on our minds.
Today's my last day of work.
I'm going to meet my other
friends for going away
drinks and dinner, and it's
going to be really fun.
And I just can't believe
that I'm actually done,
and that it's
actually happening.
Because then I hope I don't
screw up and miss my flight
or anything.
I need to cancel my
Equinox membership.
I need to--
>> The First Noble Truth
is a quality of pervasive
dissatisfaction, let's say.
That agitation and
discomfort are inevitable.
Suffering is inevitable.
We're all going to die.
We know it intellectually.
Yes, sure.
I'm going to die.
But tonight?
[DOOR OPENING]
>> Merci.
Merci.
>> How do you feel about
me going on a retreat?
>> I think you're going to
turn into the Unibomber.
>> Can I have a drink on my tab?
>> My teacher used
to always say,
listen to the sound of sadness
and the heightened resonance
of laughter.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Suffering is like that.
>> I would define suffering as
a condition of the mind that
involves an inaccurate
perception of reality which
leads to disturbance that is
in the mind, in the brain,
and in the body.
>> At times, it
seemed like it was--
I was having a great time.
But I was really
depressed, really,
in the back of my
mind, all the time.
>> What I call the new epidemic
is alienation, loneliness,
and depression.
Disconnected feelings.
Even if everything is--
in a kind of
pragmatic world, it's
all taken care of, in one's
mind, lots of suffering.
>> The inner experience of my
inner engine racing through
my day, at its worst, can
be incredibly painful.
I can move into a mode where
I feel like I'm actually
perpetuating the problem.
Like I'm really making it worse.
And so I go, and I feel
like I'm feeling bad.
And then I don't
want to feel bad,
so I kind of reject
the fact that I'm
feeling bad, which
means I'm not really
being present with what
I'm really feeling,
which is feeling bad.
And then in the meanwhile,
I don't want anybody
on the outside to know
that I'm suffering.
So I try to keep a
really cool look.
Like, hey, everything's fine.
There's no problem.
So I've got my children and
my wife and my colleagues
that I work with, and
not to mention people
that are sharing
the road with me,
as I race down the street
in my car, feeling this way.
There are like two
screenings on one night.
>> About six months ago, I was
applying to business school.
And I just really
couldn't do it.
And I realized that
I really wanted
to do something
else with my life.
So I'm going to be
gone for five months.
Long, black sweater-thing.
Body sweater.
Yeah.
And I'm going to be doing
a retreat by myself,
basically in the mountains.
I'm going to go
before I have kids
and a house and a mortgage.
I'm going to go and
really focus on myself
before it gets too crazy.
>> For human beings, it's
very good to understand subtle
discontentment in every moment.
And that's the core quality
of suffering that we all have.
And so when Dharma says
everything is suffering,
it's that that you
are looking at.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Baby, baby--
no, I want to sing a
song I know the words to.
>> Put your seat belt on.
>> I want another song
I know the words to.
>> I hate this song.
>> The combination of speed,
of instant gratification,
it's very painful.
And all my struggles up to
that point and even today
deal with the fact
that I want things
to be fixed in a certain way.
>> You're entitled to
be happy all the time.
I mean, that's the fundamental
message of America, I think,
the American dream.
If you get more,
you'll be happier.
If you get different,
And that if you're not
happy, something's wrong,
and we can fix it.
We'll fix it with a product,
we'll fix it with medication,
we'll fix it with entertainment.
>> The expectation that
if we just try harder,
we can hit the pleasure
button, and we'll get the M&M
that's going to
fall down the chute,
it really is a very compelling
way to spend one's day,
from one thing to the next.
>> And that it's not OK to
be restless, to be empty,
to be bored, to be
sad, to be angry.
It's just not OK.
>> I've been in this place.
It's only your focus to
yourself and your suffering.
And your suffering is the most
biggest in the whole worldwide.
We have thousands of
people dying by hunger,
but you don't see
that suffering.
Definitely is ego,
focused to your ego.
Who taught that?
Buddha Shakyamuni taught
that in his teachings.
You want to reduce your emotion?
Reduce your ego.
>> This is my 16th year at
the Institute of Buddhist
Dialectics.
The first 10 years,
I really struggled.
These studies, they're like
an analytical meditation
we have to go through.
We analyze, and analyze
it, like how does it apply,
and how does it really work?
And you just totally
apply it to your own life.
There's just no way around it.
All the difficulties that I
went through, I mean, of course
there were lots of
external circumstances,
like when my classmates
didn't treat me the way
I wanted them to.
In the end, it was really
my self-grasping attitude
that was in my way.
I mean, it was like I
got angry, and yeah.
It was totally that.
So my main obstacle has always
been self-grasping might.
>> As far as being
like me on my own,
because obstacle is what
it comes down to, you know?
And it gets discouraging,
especially when I first
started learning
Tibetan, and it's hard.
And I'm just like, no one
understands me and whatnot.
The wandering brains and
my thoughts and everything,
it's pretty much me.
>> So it's like so much
preciousness in your life,
then any small scratch,
any small things,
maybe like small hindrance,
you cannot take it.
You want to preserve
me, perfectly.
But there's no perfect.
>> And I think the culture have
gone so much into emphasizing
your needs, your rights,
your fulfillment,
over anything and
everything being served.
>> And then we have to suffer,
because it doesn't work.
Because you have impermanence.
And the me program
never quite works.
It never works out.
>> if only we realized that
all compounded things are
impermanent, we would not shop
as much as we are shopping now.
And because of that, the
Earth is going down the hill.
Ecology has a problem.
The world is going crazy
because of the economy.
And all because we forget.
>> This culture don't
want to talk so much about
the impermanent reality.
So all to gather solid reality.
>> Investors also poured
into gold, which rose $61--
>> We think world is permanent,
beautiful, something,
but it's not like that.
So our minds have
a natural tendency
to like to go into
black and white.
It's not black and white.
>> Things are not
the way they seem,
and that's the basic issue.
That's what Buddhism
is all about.
Things are not what they seem.
>> [INAUDIBLE] you
have read anything.
>> OK.
>> So I'm going to miss you.
>> I'm going to give
you a big virtual hug.
>> Not a virtual hug.
[INAUDIBLE]
>> And then I'm
incommunicado on Sunday.
>> OK, so we've got time.
>> OK.
Yeah.
>> Dude, this is just awesome.
>> How do we get happy now?
That's the Third Noble Truth.
>> Some people say, oh, Buddha
never spoke of happiness.
But the whole
vulnerable truth is
about the absence of happiness
and how to get rid of that.
So what do you get in the end?
Genuine happiness.
>> I completely go to that
Demi Moore in "GI Jane."
>> Oh yeah.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> I really don't
care, by the way.
>> We're [INAUDIBLE].
>> Ooh!
>> [LAUGHS]
>> [INAUDIBLE].
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> There's certain moments as
a practitioner that there are
times that I can feel
very, very, very, good.
Very, very free, somehow.
Very free.
Enlightenment.
I don't know.
>> Where is the
stopover [INAUDIBLE]..
I don't know.
>> The seat of happiness
is to completely let go
of the attachment to the ego.
And it seems a
little contradictory
to find happiness for oneself
by forgetting oneself.
It seems to let go
of that attachment
would be absolute joy.
>> And then you will
receive all the lessons.
>> In the work that you do,
if you really engage with
the Dharma, I believe
strongly now that that is true
happiness.
It comes from within you.
It genuinely comes
down to how you are
and how you see the world and
how you choose to respond.
And you have your
episodes and explosions
and revert back to
the past, but you
get a way of looking at that.
[BELL RINGING]
>> I'm assuming that
enlightenment is when you are
absolutely free from all
kinds of fixation, obsession,
paranoia, judgment.
>> That stuff is
extraneous to who we are.
Do you know what I mean?
So when whatever it is
that's extraneous falls away,
there's this natural
way of being.
>> The most amazing miracle,
the best fun that you should not
miss in this joy we call a
human life is actually that.
Coming across this extraordinary
openness inside you.
This sudden realization in which
everything is suddenly clear.
>> We do experience
this all the time.
It's the quality of just being
present in our body right now.
The point of meditating
is to notice them.
>> I'm in this cell block with
five cells, two men to a cell.
And it's just chaos, radios and
TV, and yelling and screaming
and fights.
I couldn't sleep.
I was having nightmares.
My mind was constantly racing
through all these scenarios
of how I couldn't
have gotten caught
and what I could have done.
You know what?
My mind was just crazy.
But I was sitting.
I remember, one night, I
had been sitting probably
four or five hours.
And my mind just stabilized
in a very powerful way.
Even at that moment, it
was just absolute chaos.
But my mind wasn't moving.
My mind wasn't being moved
or drawn to any of it.
And at that moment, there was a
tremendous sense of competence
that arose that no matter
how difficult this prison
journey was going to
be, that I could do it.
[SINGING BOWL]
>> Buddha himself actually said
when he was asked what is way
to enlightenment,
he said meditation.
[SINGING BOWL]
In the beginning, you might
like to pay attention to breath.
Simply notice that you're
breathing in and breathing out.
>> And whenever you
notice yourself thinking,
whenever you realize it,
label that as thinking,
but then gently bring
your attention back
to your breathing.
>> So you can close your
eyes, open your eyes,
it doesn't matter.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> You create space or no
space, it doesn't matter.
You let go.
I say, now I'm going
to think spaciousness.
Rest there like that.
That's it.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> A meditation
practice develops,
then you see the Buddhist
teachings become alive.
The spaces around you become
a whole universe space,
like looking into a blue sky.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> In Sanskrit, one of the
translations of the word
meditation is familiarization.
Virtually all
forms of meditation
involve the meditator
becoming more
familiar with her
or his own mind.
>> Why does my mind work
that way, when I could--
wait.
What do I have to
do to change it
so it's not making
that same mistake over
and over again,
giving me the trouble
and making things lousy?
I know when I do this other
thing, things get better,
and things are expansive,
and I'm happier,
and everyone else around
me seems to be happier.
So it's just literally
mind training.
It's a practice, and I think
it's a really good word for it.
Over and over again, daily.
The more you do it,
your mind and your body
literally like it, like food,
like oxygen, and look forward
to it.
>> The reason why I'm in this
path and why I wake up every
day, and I think
about meditation,
and I think about sitting, and
I actually do it is because this
very moment, I want it
to be one of openness.
You sit for 10 minutes
a day, that's great.
You sit for 30 minutes
You sit for an hour
a day, that's great.
What if you sit
for three months?
>> I don't know how the me
that was in New York in a great
apartment, going out every
night, smoking, drinking,
whatever, I don't know how that
person had enough chutzpah,
I don't know,
something, to be like,
I'm leaving everything I know.
>> In the beginning, it's
very tumultuous, usually.
It's like you can't relax with
more than 10% of your mind.
So you're kind of still
managing your experiences.
Then, after some time, you
can experience maybe 20%.
It's like you relax
a little bit more.
Then maybe 30%.
And then you go through periods
that are very, very difficult.
Sometimes after a while, you can
just completely relax and let--
it doesn't matter what happens.
>> I just came in
from the snowstorm.
And that's my teapot going off.
And I'm going to make lunch now.
>> We think again
we're living life,
but I really think the point of
practice is to engage our life.
But I think when we're busy, we
don't actually engage our life.
So we need to actually sit
down and be with our mind
in this intimate kind of way.
>> There's no external input.
There's nobody there.
There's no guy not looking
at you in the right way.
There's no approval or
disapproval from your boss.
There's no parents
to say anything.
And for me, for the first like
three weeks, I just cried.
I had everything I
could possibly need.
It was just me.
And yet I was in despair.
But I'd realized that the source
of all my pain and suffering
comes from inside.
And it comes from my mind.
And that's the
same for everybody.
And that means that we all do
so much unnecessary suffering.
>> You can show that,
short-term, four, eight weeks,
half an hour a day, already
brings significant change
in your health, in
preventing depression.
So this is a great service.
And then much longer,
10,000, 15,000 hours
of meditation, that there are
deep changes in your brain
and the functioning
of your brain.
>> When we examine these
long-term practitioners,
we do see that their brains
are different from the get go.
>> Everything looks good.
We're going to set up
for the first scan.
This is going to be
eight seconds long--
>> With these long-term
practitioners,
it's just a kind of stable
bedrock of equanimity.
There's a kind of
panoramic awareness
where they're able to just
take in the large presence
of the moment.
>> For me, from the point of
view of practicing all of this,
it's how naturally and easily
can I continue to let go
and let go and let go and open
up to what I'm really feeling
without judgment and without
some big story and without some
big effort.
[CHILDREN PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Then people might consider
more seriously bringing this
in a secular way, as
His Holiness recommends,
in education.
In jails.
>> So I'm going to play you
the beginning of the chanting.
>> In all kinds of
professional situations.
>> Where my practice is meeting
my professional life more
and more, even with my
most anxious clients,
just being there and
helping them breathe.
This shows that you
definitely have enough.
So let's prioritize
things that give you
joy in the present
moment rather than trying
to build more for the
future that may never come.
>> So it's very powerful
for Western people.
Because you don't have to
turn away from your life
to realize the teachings.
You have to turn
towards your life.
>> [SPEAKING TIBETAN]
My life right now is like
the bee's knees, right?
[LAUGHS] So now the--
I'm just-- I guess part of it
is that I'm comfortable with it
now.
If you stick with it, eventually
something's going to happen.
If something's not
happening, then you
have to do the reflection,
like yo, what's going on?
There's not too many other
things that complicates life,
at least at this point.
I'm just doing
what I want to do.
[SINGING]
>> Kelsang Wangmo.
>> Today, on the occasion of
the IBD Rime Geshe Graduation
Ceremony, I would like to take
the opportunity to thank all
of you from the
bottom of my heart.
This event, I feel, is
an invaluable symbol
of educational privilege
and opportunity for women.
And I greatly
appreciate the opening
of this new door for women who
have completed their studies
in Buddhist philosophy.
>> Well, happiness is kind of
a funny word or a loaded word,
but for the last nine
years of my time in prison,
my abiding state of mind became
one of tremendous cheerfulness
and joy, which was
kind of bizarre.
I had to keep it to myself.
>> The burden of our whole
"me" thing kind of dissipates
or falls away altogether, at
least for a second or two,
and we're just there.
And there's no problem.
One thing I'll say is that
all the hospice training
in the world doesn't prepare
us to lose our loved ones.
>> I often joke that he
got through the floodlights
and the watch dogs
and everything,
and we still found
our way to each other.
>> Most of us keep all these
little defenses up or these
little parts for ourselves,
that you can't go there, Dharma.
That's my territory.
Denise didn't do that.
When she found out she was faced
with dying, just let it in.
>> Anger and fear will
absolutely do you no good.
>> For the last several months,
our home just became a retreat
center in a practice community.
>> [INAUDIBLE] I have
arrived at the time of death,
adopting only the attitude of
the enlightened spirit mind.
Friendliness and compassion and
attain perfect enlightenment
for the sake of all
sentient beings.
>> Denise died in
2008, September 3.
When you see it in these
kind of [INAUDIBLE] surround
situations, you really get
this tremendous confidence
of how powerful the Dharma is.
How transformative it is.
[BELLS RINGING AND DRUMMING]
>> So when I started, I knew
that some transformation would
take place.
I had no idea the
depth to which.
I think what happens is you
break down what seems real
and what is real.
And what I think you
get to or try to get to
is that the only thing that's
real is that you're aware.
By far, what you
give up is absolutely
no comparison to what you gain.
It completely pales
in comparison,
even though my hair was pretty.
>> [INAUDIBLE] do the practice.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> An eagle cloud.
>> Oh, nice.
>> Hi, Mommy.
>> I really think
Dharma helps people.
>> Hi, Daddy.
>> Baby.
>> Actually helps
them in their lives.
>> I'm so happy you
guys are all here.
That's so sweet of you to come.
>> Imagine that a cure for
suffering has been found.
And think for a minute
what a big deal that is.
>> This may be the time in
which Buddha Dharma can do
the greatest good and the time
when there's the greatest need.
Because it actually gives us
skillful means by which we
can transform our own suffering
and increase our capacity
to stay present in
a world that may
become much more challenging.
What's really needed is
relatively realized people,
at whatever level
of realization,
out in the world, showing
up and being helpful.
>> I think the future of
Buddhism is really in the best.
>> Future teacher.
Future teacher.
>> Dharma is a healing
path, not a fixing path.
And a healing path,
I think, has more
to do with our ability
to bear witness.
>> In Bodhicitta, if you
are acting, thinking,
selflessly for others.
>> Whatever I'm struggling with,
the magic of knowing that you
can transform that moment.
>> And the person who cuts
you off or on the freeway,
and the grocery clerk who's
chomping her gum and ignoring
you when you say hi, and any--
you just have no idea.
>> It's not mere compassion.
It's like a kind of energy of
compassion that spreads out
and kind of influences
people, and things change.
>> If you have more
love, it's better.
If you have healthy
love, even better.
If you have compassion,
it's better for you,
better for others.
If you have an insight that
when your conflict comes
inside of you, you
know how to let it go,
that's also good things.
>> This is Buddhism
coming to the West,
and we should rejoice
in our good fortune.
And we should
probably do something
with that good fortune.
[WOMAN SINGING IN NON-ENGLISH]
>> The only remedy to me, on a
global level and an individual
level, is this new
revolution of care.
Interdependent care.
And that revolution could
possibly save one's own life.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And we, as human beings,
can save the planet.
>> We are forced
to be enlightened.
Otherwise, it would
drive us crazy.
>> From now on, I will ask you
to sit down, and in silence,
ask this question.
Am I ready to let
go of everything?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Wonder who has magic to make
the sun appear every morning?
Who makes that bird on
the elegant tree chirp?
Breath, pulse,
music, dew, sunset,
the burning embers of the fire.
There is unfathomable joy here.
You know that life is a stream.
It flows on its own.
Life is a stream.
No one knows why we are here.
Stop trying to figure
out the great mystery.
The tea in front of
you, it's getting cold.
Drink it.
Enjoy every drop of it.
And dance.
Dance until there
is no more dancing.
It is the dance without dancers.
This is how great mystics dance.